We’re now going to describe some slightly
mathematical concepts but they’re very useful,
so bear with me.
So far, when we’ve been talking about robots,
we’ve been talking a lot about the joint
angles.
What we’re going to do now is to generalize
that concept and we’re going to refer to
generalize joint coordinates.
Now, for most robots where the joints are
revolute, that is their rotating time joints,
then their generalize joint coordinate is
simply the joint angle.
But, for those small number of robots that
have got a sliding joint also known as a prismatic
joint, then the generalize joint coordinate
then would be a length, the length of that
sliding joint.
So, generalize joint coordinate is simply
a way that we can deal with robot joints that
either rotate or slide.
So, the set of all joint coordinates for the
robot we referred to as the joint configuration.
It’s a vector and typically denoted by the
symbol Q. And, the length of the vector is
N and N is the number of joints.
So, joint configuration Q is a vector of length
N and the elements of that vector are either
an angle or a length.
The joint angle vector belongs to a space,
the space C.
We refer to this as the configuration space.
The joint configurations belong to the set
C and C is the set of all possible joint configurations.
Now, C is a subset of the N dimensional real
number space.
The other space that’s really important
when we’re talking about robots is the space
of all possible end effector poses and we
refer to this by the symbol T. We say that
the end effector pose ksi E belongs to the
set T, the set of all possible end effector
poses.
In two dimensions, T is a subset of all possible
translations and rotations.
And, the reason that it’s a subset is that
the robot has only got finite reach.
It can’t reach out to the horizon.
For example, so T is a subset of all possible
positions and orientations in two dimensions.
For example, we’ve looked at robots where
the end effector pose is simply described
by the coordinates X and Y.
We’ve also looked at some robots where the
end effector pose is described by the position
X and Y and by the orientation Theta.
In three dimensions, we would say that T is
a subset of SE3, the set of all possible positions
and orientations in three dimensional space.
And, we’ve, again, look at some specific
examples where the end effector pose is described
just in terms of its position, X, Y and Z,
some robots where the end effector pose is
described by position X, Y and Z and a single
pitch angle.
We’ve also looked at some robots whose end
effector can be described in terms of the
position X, Y and Z and orientation roll,
pitch and yaw angles for example.
These are all subsets of SE3.
The next important consideration then is the
dimensions of these different spaces, the
task space, the space in which we describe
the pose of the end effector, and the configuration
space in which we describe the joint coordinates
of the robot.
We say that a robot has got so many degrees
of freedom and that’s equal to the number
of joints the robot has and that’s the dimension
of its configuration space.
So, if a robot has got three joints, then
we say that its configuration space has got
three dimensions.
Similarly, we could talk about the degrees
of freedom in the task space and that’s
equal to the dimension of the task space T.
Consider the pose of a simple planar robot.
Its end effector pose is described simply
by the two coordinates X and Y.
In this case, the dimension of a task space
is 2.
If it’s a planar robot with three joints,
then the end effector pose can be described
by the X and Y position and the orientation
Theta.
In this case, we would say that the dimension
of a task space is 3.
It’s described by a three-dimensional vector.
For a three-dimensional robot whose end effector
pose is described by the position, coordinates
X, Y and Z, the dimension of its task space
is also 3.
The robot that has got X, Y, Z position and
also a pitch angle, dimension of its task
space is 4.
And, for something like an industrial robot
whose end effector pose is described by position
X, Y, Z and orientation which could be described
by three angles, for instance, roll, pitch,
yaw angles, the dimension of its task space
is 6.
In the three-dimensional world in which we
live and which the robots live, it’s not
possible to have a task space dimension be
given 6.
Now, the really important constraint is that
in order to reach all of the task space, the
dimension of the configuration space should
be greater than or equal to the dimension
of the task space.
To make this concrete, let’s look again
at the 2-degree freedom arm which we should
be quite familiar with by now.
The end effector pose is an element of the
task space and the task space is a subset
of the two-dimensional space of real numbers.
End effector pose can be described by a pair
of two real numbers.
The configuration space for this robot is
a vector that comprises Q1 and Q2, the two
joint angles.
The configuration space is also a subset of
the two-dimensional space of real numbers
because the joint configuration can be described
by a pair of real numbers, that is Q1 and
Q2.
For the 3-degree of freedom arm, the end effector
pose is described by three numbers, X, Y and
Theta.
So, we say now that the task space is a subset
of the set of all possible positions and the
subset of all possible orientations which
we denote by S. The configuration space is
a vector comprising Q1, Q2 and Q3 and that
is a subset of the three dimensional space
of real numbers.
By now, I’m sure you’re getting the hang
of this.
In this case, the task space is a subset of
r cubed, the set of three-dimensional real
numbers.
And, the configuration space is also a subset
of three-dimensional space of real numbers.
A Cartesian Gantry robot is a special case
because the joint coordinates directly map
on to the end effector pose.
The joint coordinates are in fact the lengths
X, Y and Z.
A 4-degree of freedom SCARA robot arm has
an end effector pose described by a position
X, Y and Z and a yaw angle.
So, we would say that its task space is a
subset of r cubed, the set of all possible
positions, and the set of all possible orientations.
Its configuration space is a four-dimensional
quantity and it comprises the three rotational
joint angles and a vertical displacement of
the tool.
A 4-degree of freedom parallel link robot,
again, has a four-dimensional task space.
It’s able to control the position and orientation
of the end effector and it has a four-dimensional
configuration space.
There are four motors located at the base
connected by links to the end effector.
The four joint educational robot that we looked
at before has a four-dimensional task space
which can be described by a position X, Y,
Z and a pitch angle, and its configuration
is also four-dimensional because there are
four rotational joints in this robot.
The same thing applies for an arm of the NAO
robot.
For a 6-degree of freedom arm such as shown
here, the task space is a subset of SE3, the
set of all possible positions in three-dimensional
space and the set of all possible orientations
in three-dimensional space.
The configuration space of all these robots
is also six-dimensional.
They all have six joints or 6 degrees of freedom.
The industrial robot and the space shuttle
arm have got six rotational joints.
Whereas, the Stanford arm has got five rotational
joints and one sliding joint.
This is a very special case.
This is a robot with a very large number of
rotational joints.
The task space of this robot is exactly the
same as the robots on the previous slide.
The end effector pose is described by its
position and by its orientation.
It’s got six dimensions.
But, the configuration space for a robot like
this could be quite massive.
I don’t actually know how many joints this
robot’s got, but I’m guessing that it’s
got a hundred joints.
So, I’m going to say that its configuration
space is a subset of the 100-dimensional space
of real numbers.
So, in this case, the dimension of the configuration
space is greater than the dimension of the
task space.
We call this a redundant robot.
An advantage of the redundant robot is that
the tool-tip can achieve any position and
orientation just like a 6-degree of freedom
industrial robot does, but with its additional
degrees of freedom, it can also control the
shape of the arm.
So, it can control the pose of the end effector
and the shape of the arm.
An industrial robot with only six joints can
only control the pose of the end effector.
It can’t choose an arbitrary configurational
shape of its arm.
Another way that we describe robot arms is
in terms of a configuration string and this
is a string of characters, one character per
joint and the character is either an R for
a rotational joint or P for a prismatic or
sliding joint.
So, here we can see the configuration strings
for three quite different sorts of robot.